        Trade in Godsfire               (c) 1997 Richard W. Smith


In the current rules there is no advantage to being at peace with a
world and one dis-advantage: if you are at war with a world then the
ruler of that world can not freely move subversion money into your
system. So apart from the 'peaceful' scenarios, players typically
declare war against one and all to force enemies to physically escort
cash to their planet's surface. 

These rules will give a bonus to the economies of worlds that are
trading with many other worlds. These rules will usually place more
money in play which speeds up the game (a good thing in my humble
opinion). 

You may be at peace with a player, but prevent trade. On the other hand,
worlds controlled by two players in a shooting war may continue to
freely trade with each other. 

Thus the rules that talk about landing subversion monies no longer care
if star ships are fighting, they will controlled by weather or not the
world that is receiving the subversion money is allowing free trade or
not from the world that the money came from.

Note that under these rules, between some worlds, money will travel
faster than light. This is a simplification to avoid having to keep
track of locations of merchant fleets escorting money. I believe that
you will find these rules to be quite playable. 

Trade 1 

Instead of getting one bonus giga-bucks for each world you control, the
size of the bonus earned by a world depends on the number of other
worlds that world is freely trading with (see table below). There are no
counters that need to be moved, the 'trade fleets' are privately owned,
are not controlled by any player and never appear on the map. It is
assumed that if trade is not suppressed, it will naturally occur in the
background. The only affects of trade are on the world bonus and on the
ease that subversion money can be sent from one world to another (as per
the normal rules for when worlds are at peace).

The # of other
worlds a given          Giga Buck
world is                        bonus
trading with.           per turn.
______________________________________________
 0                              -1  (see Trade rule 2)
 1                              +0
 2 or  3                        +1
 4 or  5                        +2
 6 to  8                        +3
 9 to 11                        +4  (see Trade rule 3)
12 to 14                        +5  (see Trade rule 3)

Trade 2

For no reason may a world's income go below 1 GB / turn.

Trade 3
        
To gain a +4 or +5 income bonus you must be able to use faster than
light travel. (Without ftl drive, trade with the most distant parts of
the cluster is so difficult and slow that it nets you no significant
economic bonus.)

Trade 4
        
Trade need not be symmetric. For example, Grom may allow Vand's
merchants to trade freely at its ports but Vand may prevent Grom's
traders. In this case, Grom may gain an economic bonus, but will pay the
price as it will be easier for the player controlling Vand to sneak in
subversion monies. 

If a player controls more than one world, some of her worlds may allow
trade with other worlds and some may prevent it. Thus if a world is
unstable politically, you may wish cut off its trade with hostile worlds
until you can stabilize the situation. 

Trade 5

The status of trade with other systems may be changed once per turn
after the landing of subversion monies. Thus if you claim the economic
bonus, the enemy player will have time to land hostile monies.

Trade 6

If a world is blockaded, the player blockading the system may choose to
block trade with any or all other worlds. 

If the blockading player chooses to allow some trade, the blockaded
world may still prevent trade with any or all other world's. (However it
won't be able to prevent the landing of monies escorted to the system by
enemy fleets.) 

Typically blockading fleets will stop all trade in order to strangle the
economy of the besieged world. 

Trade 7

When constructing their own scenarios, players must decide which neutral
worlds are trading with which players. Usually neutral worlds will trade
with everyone until a player attacks a neutral world's units. From that
point on, the attacked neutral will not trade with any of that player's
worlds.

If you have any questions or suggestions, feel free to write me at:

rsmith@lightspeed.ca
